h1. MongoDoc

Version: Turbulence (0.4.2) 2010/03/23

h2. What's New in Turbulence (0.4.2)

Support for the $ positional operator for in-place array updates. This requires MongoDB version 1.3.4 or higher.

h2. What's New in Turbulence (0.4.1)

API changes (@key@ and @has_*@ still supported, will be deprectated soon)

* @MongoDoc::Document.attr_accessor@ works like the old @key@ macro, and allows two parameters:
** @:default => 'some default value'@
** @:type => Date@ used when dealing with values from the web which will be coming in as @String@ values
* Association macros have been renamed
** @embed@ was @has_one@
** @embed_many@ was @has_many@
** @embed_hash@ was @has_hash@

Indexing suppport

* @MongoDoc::Document.index@

h2. Notes

* 2010-03-12 Thanks to weather in ATL, cleaned up attr_accessor and switched to embed association macros
* 2010-03-10 Slides are out of date, use key instead of attr_accessor with MongoDoc::Document (implementation was way too hackish)
* 2010-02-23 API is *changing* significantly
* 2010-01-23 Tracking MongoDoc with @git@? *READ THIS NOTE*[1]

h2. Quick Start

* install MongoDB (at least 1.3.2)
* install the Ruby driver @gem install mongo@
* install MongoDoc @gem install mongo_doc@
* run an example from this directory @ruby -Ilib examples/simple_object.rb@

h2. Introduction

MongoDoc is a simple and easy to use ActiveRecord-like object mapper for "mongoDB":http://www.mongodb.org in Ruby.

MongoDoc is _also_ an extension of the "Mongo Ruby Driver":http://github.com/mongodb/mongo-ruby-driver making it a snap to get Ruby in and out of mongoDB.

MongoDoc is *not* ActiveRecord for mongoDB.  We do not have callbacks, nor do we have dynamic finders.  We do have associations, named scopes, and other features.

MongoDoc *is* simple, easy-to-use, and fast. And it works with Rails (2.3.x at the moment, 3 soonish?).

MongoDoc is designed to work with document data, if you are looking to map relational data in mongoDB, you will have to look elsewhere.

h2. Ruby objects in mongoDB

Lets just get right into it and save some Ruby objects in mongoDB!

bc.. class Contact
  attr_accessor :name, :addresses, :interests
end

class Address
  attr_accessor :street, :city, :state, :zip, :phone_number
end

p. With MongoDoc, instead of saving JSON[2], we can save an object directly:

bc.. contact = Contact.new
contact.name = 'Hashrocket'
contact.interests = ['ruby', 'rails', 'agile']

address = Address.new
address.street = '320 First Street North, #712'
address.city = 'Jacksonville Beach'
address.state = 'FL'
address.zip = '32250'
address.phone_number = '877 885 8846'
contact.addresses = [address]

collection.save(contact)

p. We can query using the powerful mongoDB query syntax, and have it return Ruby objects:

bc.. in_fl = collection.where('addresses.state' => 'FL')
in_fl_hashrocket = in_fl.where('name' => /rocket/)
puts in_fl_hashrocket.first.addresses.first.phone_number

p. Take a look in the examples directory for more code.

h2. Mapping Documents

MongoDoc provides ActiveRecord-like persistence, associations, named scopes, and validations (from "Validatable":http://github.com/durran/validatable) as well as a mongoDB query language (from "Mongoid":http://mongoid.org/home). MongoDoc also plays nicely with Rails.

@MongoDoc::Document@ provides all these features as a mixin.  A @MongoDoc::Document@ can either be a top-level mongoDB document, or an embedded document contained within a top-level document. Top-level documents are stored in collections named after their class: @Contact@ objects are stored in the 'contacts' collection (much like ActiveRecord).

Lets define a @Contact@ document with an @Address@ embedded document:

bc.. class Address
  include MongoDoc::Document

  attr_accessor :street
  attr_accessor :city
  attr_accessor :state
  attr_accessor :zip_code
  attr_accessor :phone_number
end

class Contact
  include MongoDoc::Document

  attr_accessor :name
  attr_accessor :interests
  embed_many :addresses

  scope :in_state, lambda {|state| where('addresses.state' => state)}
end

p. Since a mongoDB document has no fixed schema, we define the composition of a document directly in our classes. We can also specify associations using @embed@, @embed_many@, and @embed_hash@ (similar to ActiveRecord's @has_one@ and @has_many@.

Building and saving a document is easy:

bc.. contact = Contact.new(:name => 'Hashrocket', :interests => ['ruby', 'rails', 'agile'])
contact.addresses << Address.new(:street => '320 1st Street North, #712',
  :city => 'Jacksonville Beach',
  :state => 'FL',
  :zip_code => '32250',
  :phone_number => '877 885 8846')
contact.save

p. Now that we have some data, we can query using our named scope:

bc.. hashrocket_in_fl = Contact.in_state('FL').where(:name => /rocket/)
hashrocket_address = hashrocket_in_fl.first.addresses.first

p. And we can even perform partial updates:

bc. hashrocket_address.update_attributes(:street => '320 First Street North, #712')

h2. Installation

MongoDoc *requires* mongoDB v1.3.2 or later.

bc. sudo gem install mongo_doc

h2. Connecting

By default, MongoDoc will read its configuration from @./mongodb.yml@. If that file does not exist, it will attempt to connect to a standard MongoDB local server setup and use a database name of @"mongodoc"@.

h3. With Rails

If you are using Rails, MongoDoc will look for its configuration in @config/mongodb.yml@. If that file does not exist, it will attempt to connect to a standard MongoDB local server setup and use a database name of @#{Rails.root.basename}_#{Rails.env}@.

h3. Database configuration file

The file is similar to the Rails database.yml file, with environment definitions containing the database configuration attributes. For example:

bc. development:
  name: development
  host: localhost
  port: 27017
  options:
    auto_reconnect: true
test:
  name: test
  host: localhost
  port: 27017
  options:
    auto_reconnect: true

If you are not using Rails, the default environment is @development@ and you can set the current environment in your code:

bc. MongoDoc::Connection.env = 'test'

You can also change the location of the configuration file:

bc. MongoDoc::Connection.config_path = './config/mongodb.yml'

h3. Programmatically setting the database connection information

Finally, if you do not want to use the database configuration file, you can also set the database name, host, port, options, and strict values directly; for example, to set the database name to @stats@:

bc. MongoDoc::Connection.name = 'stats'

h2. Credits

Les Hill, leshill on github

h3. Thanks

Thanks to Sandro and Durran for some great conversations and some lovely code.

h2. Note on Patches/Pull Requests

* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but
  bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

h2. Copyright

Copyright (c) 2009 - 2010 Les Hill. See LICENSE for details.

fn1. Building from @HEAD@? MongoDoc *requires* mongoDB v1.3.2 or later. That means you must be using the 1.3.x nightly build as of 2010-01-22 .

fn2. The Ruby driver exposes an API that understands JSON.
